09-routing-animation/README.md, before:

# Routing, animation - front-end web technology

Navigate between pages - smoothly!

Please read:

- [History API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History)
- [popstate event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/popstate_event)
- [Using CSS transforms](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Transforms/Using_CSS_transforms)
- [Using CSS transitions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Transitions/Using_CSS_transitions)

## Supplemental reading material

- [How to Create Your Own React Router](https://dev.to/franciscomendes10866/create-your-own-react-router-53ng)

## Why is routing exciting?

- Split information between pages to navigate between
- Back navigation - go back to where I came from
- Sharable deep links

## Why is animation exciting?

- Motion can show what
  - happens (e.g. click indication)
  - happened (e.g. routing)
  - will happen (e.g. call to action)
- Motion can draw attention
- CSS transitions are much more efficient than animating with JavaScript

## Server- or client-side routing?

Server-side routing:

- Multiple HTML files, also called an MPA
- Path-based routing: `/basket`, `/delivery`
- Benefit: sharable links
- Drawback: navigation loads a new HTML file, resetting all state

Client-side routing:

- Single HTML file, also called a Single Page App (SPA)
- Query-based routing: `/?page=basket`, `/?page=delivery`
- Benefit: sharable links, no page load on navigation

Path-based routing is possible with client-side routing, but require URL rewrite rules to be configured server side for sharable links to work.

## Client-side routing

- `window.location.search` - get the current route
- `URLSearchParams` - parse query part of URL
- listen for `popstate` event with `addEventListener`
- useEffect to synchronize URL with App state
- conditional render based on App state

## Client-side navigation

- `history.pushState` - to ensure that back will work
- `popstate`, `dispatchEvent` - trigger the listener to synchronize with app state

## CSS Transitions

- animatable properties: opacity, size, color, position, rotation, many more
- may use `transform` for relative changes: scale, translate, rotate
- `transition`: property, duration, timing-function, delay
- transitions acts on property changes on that element caused
- change properties with pseudo selector (e.g. `:hover`) or class names
- explore timing functions: - https://easings.net/

Sample call-to-action button transition:

```css
.call-to-action button {
  transition: transform 0.2s ease-in;
}

.call-to-action button:hover {
  transform: scale(1.1);
}
```

Sample navigation transition:

```css
.page {
  transition: opacity 0.4s ease-in;
}

.page.navigating {
  opacity: 0;
}

.page.navigated {
  opacity: 1;
}
```

## Next time

[State](..).

Commit message:

server redirects for path based routing

09-routing-animation/README.md, after:

# Routing, animation - front-end web technology

Navigate between pages - smoothly!

Please read:

- [History API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History)
- [popstate event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/popstate_event)
- [Using CSS transforms](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Transforms/Using_CSS_transforms)
- [Using CSS transitions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Transitions/Using_CSS_transitions)

## Supplemental reading material

- [How to Create Your Own React Router](https://dev.to/franciscomendes10866/create-your-own-react-router-53ng)

## Why is routing exciting?

- Split information between pages to navigate between
- Back navigation - go back to where I came from
- Sharable deep links

## Why is animation exciting?

- Motion can show what
  - happens (e.g. click indication)
  - happened (e.g. routing)
  - will happen (e.g. call to action)
- Motion can draw attention
- CSS transitions are much more efficient than animating with JavaScript

## Server- or client-side routing?

Server-side routing:

- Multiple HTML files, also called an MPA
- Path-based routing: `/basket`, `/delivery`
- Benefit: sharable links
- Drawback: navigation loads a new HTML file, resetting all state

Client-side routing:

- Single HTML file, also called a Single Page App (SPA)
- Query-based routing: `/?page=basket`, `/?page=delivery`
- Benefit: sharable links, no page load on navigation

Path-based routing is possible with client-side routing, but require URL rewrite rules to be configured server side for sharable links to work. This is recommended, but outside the scope of this course, as every server framework handles this differently. For Netlify, this can be done with a `_redirects` file, see https://docs.netlify.com/routing/redirects/.

## Client-side routing

- `window.location.search` - get the current route
- `URLSearchParams` - parse query part of URL
- listen for `popstate` event with `addEventListener`
- useEffect to synchronize URL with App state
- conditional render based on App state

## Client-side navigation

- `history.pushState` - to ensure that back will work
- `popstate`, `dispatchEvent` - trigger the listener to synchronize with app state

## CSS Transitions

- animatable properties: opacity, size, color, position, rotation, many more
- may use `transform` for relative changes: scale, translate, rotate
- `transition`: property, duration, timing-function, delay
- transitions acts on property changes on that element caused
- change properties with pseudo selector (e.g. `:hover`) or class names
- explore timing functions: - https://easings.net/

Sample call-to-action button transition:

```css
.call-to-action button {
  transition: transform 0.2s ease-in;
}

.call-to-action button:hover {
  transform: scale(1.1);
}
```

Sample navigation transition:

```css
.page {
  transition: opacity 0.4s ease-in;
}

.page.navigating {
  opacity: 0;
}

.page.navigated {
  opacity: 1;
}
```

## Next time

[State](..).
